# varscan_vcf_remap

Normalize fields in VCF files generated by Varscan for use with [TinDaisy](https://github.com/ding-lab/TinDaisy) CWL workflow.

Modify Varscan-generated VCF files to make format of AD field more consistent with other callers.
Specifically, value of the per-genotype AD field becomes "RD,AD".  The RD field is removed.
Care is taken to update the meta-information lines to be consistent with FORMAT fields.

## Varscan input

Tested to work with Varscan 2.3.8.  

From [Varscan documentation](http://varscan.sourceforge.net/somatic-calling.html), 
details about FORMAT fields:

* `AD` - Reads supporting variant in tumor (or normal)
* `RD` - Reads supporting reference in tumor (or normal)

[See also VCF 4.2 documentation](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/VCFv4.2.pdf)

We assume a particular order and names of the FORMAT fields: `GT:GQ:DP:RD:AD:FREQ:DP4`.  
It is an error if FORMAT field is different (can be overridden with `-w` flag).

## Output

### Meta-information

VCF meta-information lines are modified as follows
  * FORMAT meta-info line for ID=RD is removed
  * FORMAT meta-info line for ID=AD is rewritten as,
```
##FORMAT=<ID=AD,Number=R,Type=Integer,Description="Allelic depths for the ref and alt alleles in the order listed">
```
  * FILTER meta-info line is added as follows, to indicate that this VCF was processed,
```
##FILTER=<ID=varscan_AD,Description="Modify varscan AD and RD FORMAT field. New AD is 'RD,AD'; RD is removed ">
```

### Call information

The FORMAT field for each call is rewritten as, `GT:GQ:DP:AD:FREQ:DP4`

The genotype data for both TUMOR and NORMAL is modified as,

* `AD`=`RD_old,AD_old`
* `RD` is removed from the FORMAT field

## Development

Preliminary analysis of varscan VCF and issues associated with merging took place on 
`MGI:/gscuser/mwyczalk/projects/TinDaisy/CromwellRunner/adhoc-test/20191226.heiman`.
Contents of this work are saved in `doc/20191226.heiman.tar.gz`

For development and testing purposes, this project ships with test data and
demonstration scripts for running within different contexts (direct, docker, cwl).  See
`./testing` for details and code.

Project structure is based on [MNP Filter CWL Tool](https://github.com/ding-lab/mnp_filter)

Implementation of filter is modeled after [TinDaisy-Core merge filter](https://github.com/ding-lab/TinDaisy-Core/blob/master/src/vcf_filters/merge_filter.py),
which is based on [PyVCF](https://pyvcf.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) (with code available for inspection in image
here: `/usr/local/lib/python3.8/site-packages/vcf`)

Latest docker image: `mwyczalkowski/varscan_vcf_remap:20191228`

## Contact

Matt Wyczalkowski (m.wyczalkowski@wustl.edu)


